Why Vaccines Should Not Be Mandatory: An impressive panel of considered expert researchers weigh into this crucial debate, including yours truly of the Vaccine Resistance Movement. An honour to be chosen for my analysis alongside one of my vaccine researcher heroes: the prolific Neil Z. Miller.
 justice
‘This question is predicated on the assumption that vaccines actually work, that the science itself is officially settled: in particular, the effectiveness of “herd immunity” as a proactive strategy to protect the community from the spread of viral, bacterial or fungal infections. Secondly, it necessitates the right of the majority to impose a health directive on a certain sector of the community against their will.
 
Many families have determined that vaccines are counter-active to the natural immune properties of the human body, that they hinder a child’s neurological and neuro-developmental capacity via a neuro-toxic breach of their delicate central nervous system apparatus, prematurely strip them of vital trace minerals and anti-oxidants; in many instances spreading the very disease or disorder which they claim to prevent.
 
This science-based evidence is supported by a new generation of enlightened doctors and medical researchers, who have witnessed the overwhelming damage caused by vaccines first-hand.  
 
In the absence of genuine health freedom, legislators will see fit to utilize authoritarian measures on any faction of the population with impunity. This is the basis of a Totalitarian system.  
 
Self-determination of the body is non-negotiable. Every parent or guardian is bound to protect their child’s inalienable right to self-determination of the body, what goes in it, and if so, administered by whom. The Government has no authority, whatsoever, to regulate, monitor or deny these primary parental rights.
 
Voluntary consent is a defining criteria of any open society. There are numerous historic charters which have laid down the parameters for preventing any infringement on this sacred ground. The imposition of mandatory vaccines would thereby forfeit the legality (lawfulness) of these formal declarations, thus rendering our bodies the property of the state.’ Joel Lord, founder and director of the Vaccine Resistance Movement

