
The Role of the FDA

The FDA's job is to make sure all food -- genetically altered or not -- is safe to eat.

Through the Plant Biotechnology Consultation Program, the FDA raises safety concerns during the engineering process and helps developers identify the kinds of testing they should do.

A team of FDA scientists reviews information provided by the developer. They look at how a genetically engineered food compares to the original. Is it different nutritionally? Did the new genes introduce something that could be harmful? For example, a soybean enriched with a protein from a Brazil nut wasn't brought to market, even as animal feed, because tests showed that it might trigger a reaction for people with an allergy to those nuts.
Continue Reading Below

You can't catch a disease or get a virus from a plant, but every now and then one makes its way from animals to humans, like swine flu and bird flu. Because animal viruses may be used in genetic engineering, some people worry they could infect humans or other animals that eat meat produced this way.

That's why the FDA takes a slightly different approach with genetically engineered animal products. They've issued guidance to help developers meet the high standards of the Codex Alimentarius and U.S. food safety regulations. The Center for Veterinary Medicine makes sure the animal is different in the way the developer says it is and that it's safe to eat. The FDA is also required by the National Environmental Policy Act to consider potential significant impacts of GMO animals on the environment, like how easily they could spread disease.

For a genetically engineered salmon that grows to full size in about half the time it normally takes, the FDA wanted to know how likely these fish would be to mix with ones whose genes haven't been tinkered with and how likely they would be to survive and reproduce if they did. To minimize the risks, the developer raises the salmon in secure facilities in Canada and Panama. The tanks aren't connected to any body of water, and they have barriers such as screens and nets to prevent fish and eggs from getting out as well as birds and other predators from getting in. The salmon grown for food are sterile.

A GMO food isn't allowed in stores in the U.S. until the FDA team is satisfied it's safe. Ultimately, the developer is legally responsible for the food's safety, like any other product we eat.

