
Can GMOs Change Your DNA?

Even though it's never happened before, some people fear that you could become genetically modified from eating GMO food. But genetic material doesn't get tacked on like pin the tail on the donkey. An "added" gene isn't going to fall off and get stuck to yours.

Bacteria-fighting enzymes and processes in your body are designed to prevent a genetic invasion. As a report from the American Medical Association's Council on Science and Public Health explains, if an outside germ somehow survived digestion and got into your gut bacteria, it would have to be enough like your own DNA, in just the right place at just the right time, to glom onto one of your genes and change it.

To put things in perspective: It's just as possible (or impossible) for non-GMO foods to change your genes. Anything you eat has DNA that's "foreign" to you.

Even so, scientists take great care not to use genes that have any hint that they might cause problems.
What's in Your Food?

Even though you may not realize it, you probably eat GMOs now. Up to 80% of processed foods in the U.S. have them.
Continue Reading Below

Most of the sugar we eat comes from beets, and almost all of them are GMOs these days. Changing their genes has brought about bigger, better sugar beets that are stronger and last longer than those grown in the past.

And whatever the source, "It's just sugar or sucrose. No DNA, no protein," Van Eenennaam says. "There isn't something different or extra in sugar that comes from a bioengineered sugar beet." Nothing in the sugar can tell you where it came from. You can't avoid eating "genetically engineered sugar" because it doesn't exist, she explains.

Engineered corn is the source of a lot of cornstarch used to thicken soups and sauces as well as the corn syrup that sweetens foods and drinks. Cottonseed, canola, and soybean oils made from GMOs go into mayo, salad dressing, cereal, bread, and snacks galore.

But way more GMOs -- as much as 90% of what's grown -- are used as animal feed. Studies show there is no difference in the makeup of meat, milk, eggs, or other food that comes from animals who've been fed them.

And the animals themselves are just as healthy as those that eat non-GMO meals. The FDA looks out for them by testing the safety of animal feed, too.

