
Can You Avoid Them?

China, Australia, and the European Union require GMO foods to be labeled, but the U.S. doesn't. Many states are in the process of passing laws about the labeling and sale of genetically engineered food, but some federal lawmakers are trying to overrule them and prevent that.

The FDA favors voluntary labeling and has published recommendations for manufacturers. The agency also takes public comments about this guidance and is considering some citizen petitions.

The question of what could need a label is another sticky subject. Foods created by changing genes with radiation or chemicals don't fall under GMO regulations and wouldn't have to be labeled. The latest methods of genetic engineering aren't covered by older rules, so you won't see labels on those foods either. But the National Academy of Sciences says this inconsistency doesn't make sense: What matters is the fact that genes have been artificially changed, not the way it was done.

If you want to stay away from GMOs, eat only fresh, whole, unprocessed foods marked "certified organic" or "USDA organic." That's how MacDonald shops. But the makers of these foods tag them on the honor system, and they're not checked by the government. And it's OK for these claims to appear on foods developed from genes originally altered by chemicals or radiation.
Continue Reading Below

Claims of "non-GMO" and "GMO free" can't be scientifically or legally supported by any testing methods. But the nonprofit Non-GMO Project has independently certified specific foods and products from more than 1,900 brands as made with best practices for avoiding GMOs: Look for the Non-GMO Project Verified seal.

In the produce section, only a few things might be GMOs:

    Edamame
    Papayas from Hawaii
    Summer squash
    Sweet corn
    Zucchini

The faster-growing salmon, which the FDA cleared in November 2015 after several years of study, will probably be the first animal GMO in the supermarket, after guidelines are set for how to label it. Even if that happened today, it would be months or years before you could buy any.

Stores like Earth Fare, The Fresh Market, Sprouts Farmers Market, and Whole Foods want to make sure their customers know what they're buying and have choices. These grocers offer their own non-GMO products as well as stocking other brands without GMOs. When you're dining out, your best bet is a restaurant that uses organic ingredients.

