The media circus surrounding our Vaccine Summit held in 2013 has succeeded in reopening the Vaccine-Autism debate. That milestone, alone, indicates that we have shaken the foundations of the Medical Empire and inspired the community to begin this paradigm shift away from dependency on outside forces back to self-awareness & self-sufficiency. More coverage, including video excerpts to come.  An online poll conducted by mainstream outlets asked: Do you believe vaccinations cause autism 66.06% (726 votes) said yes, there is a clear causal connection between vaccination and resulting Autism, while 27.84% (306 votes) refuted the link, with 6.1% (67 votes) undecided. This comment of mine was conveniently edited out of the local Metro news print version in BC, Canada. In fact, any references, in the article, to Autism, were promptly removed, an indication that editorial staff were either pressured into narrowing the parameters of the discussion, or inclined to tip the scales in their favor  – “Autism used to be one in 20,000,” he said. “It is now as high as one in 38, which converts to one in 30 in boys, because boys are four times more likely to succumb to autism.” http://metronews.ca/news/vancouver/591086/vaccine-summit-in-vancouver-tries-to-rekindle-settled-debate/

The Health-Sciences Dep’t at Simon Fraser University (SFU), Vancouver, British Columbia, recently received a donation of 1.4 million dollars worth of lab equipment from Vaccine manufacturing giant Merck – producers of the the Gardasil Vaccine. This is the real reason why they tried to deny the Vaccine Resistance Movement access to their campus. All mainstream media outlets conveniently buried this evidence, which we provided to them up front.

‘Simon Fraser University scientists are busy opening boxes full of shiny new toys for their teaching and research programs. This seasonal excitement comes courtesy of a $1.4 million equipment donation from Merck Canada. Boxes containing scientific tools and equipment – from pipettes and balances up to an ABI 3730xl DNA Analyzer, the gold standard in high-throughput automated Sanger DNA sequencing – have arrived at SFU and will be used to support research and teaching in a number of areas that affect human health, including virology, immunology, toxicology, biochemistry and pathology.

“SFU’s faculty of health sciences is a pretty new faculty, and it typically takes many years to build up a critical mass of laboratory infrastructure. Merck has really enhanced our ability to do high level research by giving us all of this equipment at once.”’
