My recent collision with mainstream media outlets provided a fascinating glimpse into the world behind the lens; where-in so called modern journalism now involves the coveting of misleading sound-bytes and “off the cuff” distorted rhetoric, while strategically editing out crucial material in order to support a pre-scripted slant or bias, employing loaded questions posed under pressure, designed to polarize issues, to the exclusion of balanced debate & enlightened, critical thinking type discussion – all of which reveals a growing disconnect between the dissemination of that which constitutes real news and the perpetuation of Western Medical Establishment & Vaccine lobby propaganda.

Where are the real journalists in this corrupted wilderness? Those with any integrity left must recognize that their work will never fit into the confines of the prime-time “news” format. For they are now the gatekeepers of information, whose role it is to manipulate public opinion, to keep our communities forever in the dark, and thus reward their paymasters.

This sentiment was echoed by a (semi-mainstream) journalist who interviewed me extensively in March; as a lead-up to our highly controversial VRM Vaccine Summit. He subsequently admitted that there, were, indeed, forces behind the scenes, imposing pressure upon mainstream media outlets (such as his own) to suppress our overall message from getting out. He alluded to the fact that he was on our side, but that, as a journalist, his hands were tied by his higher-ups, and therefore he couldn’t present a more balanced, informative report – the implication being that his directive, was, in fact, to discredit the anti-vaccine movement and deflect attention away from any meaningful discourse.

 “I can’t go into any details about it, but I’m telling you, there was a LOT of pressure on me (to edit out specific content). This is a very dangerous issue you’re taking on here. You’re going up against a lot of powerful people.”

 Following the release of his watered-down article on us, he spoke with a veteran doctor, none of whose children had been vaccinated, who, when asked why, quietly pointed out that vaccines are implicitly “dangerous”. My comment back to him? This is beginning to sound a lot like East Germany. In a time of universal deceit, telling the truth is a revolutionary act. It’s time more of us spoke the truth without fear of recrimination.
The media circus surrounding our recent Vaccine Summit has succeeded in reopening the Vaccine-Autism debate. That milestone, alone, indicates that we have shaken the foundations of the Medical Empire and inspired the community to begin this paradigm shift away from dependency on outside forces back to self-awareness & self-sufficiency.
 
Vaccine summit in Vancouver tries to rekindle settled debate (Metro News – national/local)
http://metronews.ca/news/vancouver/591086/vaccine-summit-in-vancouver-tries-to-rekindle-settled-debate/
merck

University Medical Departments are being used covertly to solicit biased Clinical Trial data in favor of new vaccine/drug products through the pipeline; with substantial financial “donations” from Vaccine manufacturing giants (ie. Merck, GSK); including millions of dollars worth of free medical equipment. This systemic problem of conflict-of-interest, throughout the Medical Industry, is thus nurtured long before these medical students ever reach the professional field.

The Health-Sciences Dep’t at Simon Fraser University (SFU), Vancouver, British Columbia, recently received a donation of 1.4 million dollars worth of lab equipment from Vaccine manufacturing giant Merck – producers of the Gardasil Vaccine; in addition to 2.7 million dollars from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to fund the development of a new Aids Vaccine. This is the real reason why they tried to deny the Vaccine Resistance Movement access to their campus. All mainstream media outlets conveniently buried this evidence.

‘Simon Fraser University scientists are busy opening boxes full of shiny new toys for their teaching and research programs. This seasonal excitement comes courtesy of a $1.4 million equipment donation from Merck Canada. Boxes containing scientific tools and equipment – from pipettes and balances up to an ABI 3730xl DNA Analyzer, the gold standard in high-throughput automated Sanger DNA sequencing – have arrived at SFU and will be used to support research and teaching in a number of areas that affect human health, including virology, immunology, toxicology, biochemistry and pathology.

“SFU’s faculty of health sciences is a pretty new faculty, and it typically takes many years to build up a critical mass of laboratory infrastructure. Merck has really enhanced our ability to do high level research by giving us all of this equipment at once.”’ http://www.sfu.ca/pamr/media-releases/2011/1-4-million-merck-gift-sets-holiday-season-in-motion.html

SFU HIV/AIDS vaccine research gets financial boost – ‘Jamie Scott, a Simon Fraser University professor and Canada Research Chair in molecular immunity, and three international collaborators are getting a hefty financial boost in their efforts to develop an effective HIV/AIDS vaccine.

The United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) has awarded the four researchers $2.7 million to help them improve the effectiveness of a DNA-based vaccine that Marinieve Montero first conceived of eight years ago. Montero was a student of Scott’s whose work was also funded by the NIH, the U.S.’s largest government-funded medical research agency. Scott’s current collaborators are at the University of the Basque Country, the University of Massachusetts School of Medicine and the University of California, San Francisco.

The researchers will use their new funding to strengthen a vaccine they’ve made from a DNA fragment taken from the HIV genome. The fragment encodes something that is highly prized in HIV/AIDS vaccine research. Called the MPER, it’s a region of the HIV envelope that retains mutations at a very low level compared to the rest of the virus’s genome, which continually mutates.’
http://www.sfu.ca/pamr/media-releases/2012/sfu-hiv-aids-vaccine-research-gets-financial-boost.html

Statement from the Dean of FHS (Faculty of Health Sciences) on the Vaccine Resistance Movement Event at SFU Harbour Centre: ‘It has recently come to our attention that the “Vaccine Resistance Movement” (VRM) has rented space in the SFU Harbour Centre building to host their Summit 2013 conference. Downtown SFU space is routinely rented for commercial purposes to community and corporate groups. We are deeply concerned that the public may interpret this as an indication that SFU supports the perspective of the VRM. Nothing could be further from the truth. Renting downtown campus space does not convey in any way that these events are supported or promoted by SFU. Although we believe strongly in free and open debate of public health issues, the Faculty of Health Sciences believes that VRM promotes a dangerous, anti-science message that is a threat to the health of children and communities globally. Vaccines are rigorously tested for efficacy and safety and there is no scientific evidence whatsoever to support the claims of the VRM that vaccines are responsible for autism and other auto-immune conditions.

The VRM has based their claim of a link between vaccines and autism on a paper published in 1998 in The Lancet, a prestigious medical journal, by Andrew Wakefield. It later emerged that Wakefield had received funding from litigants against vaccine manufacturers and that Wakefield had not informed colleagues or medical authorities of his conflict of interest. Had this been known, publication in The Lancet would not have taken place. A 2011 article in the British Medical Journal concluded that the data in the Wakefield study had been falsified. An accompanying editorial in the same journal described Wakefield’s work as an “elaborate fraud” which led to lower vaccination rates, putting hundreds of thousands of children at risk and diverting energy and money away from research into the true cause of autism.

In contrast, scientific evidence for the effectiveness of large-scale vaccination campaigns is well-established. Full vaccination, from birth to adolescence, of all US children born in a given year, saves an estimated 33,000 lives and prevents an estimated 14 million infections. Lack of complete vaccine coverage increases the risk of disease for the entire population, including those who have been vaccinated. Public reaction to vaccine controversies has contributed to a significant increase in preventable diseases including pertussis (whooping cough), which is currently experiencing its worst outbreak in 70 years as a result of reduced vaccination rates. Pertussis continues to be a major health problem in developing countries, where mass vaccination is not practiced; the World Health Organization estimates it caused 294,000 deaths in 2002.

VRM critics have accused the vaccine industry of misrepresenting the safety and effectiveness of vaccines and influencing health policy decisions for financial gain. There is no evidence to support this claim and conversely, many groups profit by promoting the controversiality of vaccines, such as lawyers who receive fees, expert witnesses paid to provide testimony and to speak at conferences, and practitioners of alternative medicine offering ineffective and expensive medications, supplements, and procedures. In summary, the Faculty of Health Sciences at SFU is dismayed and disappointed that the VRM group may have attempted to establish credibility by using SFU name to further promote dangerous misinformation about the efficacy and safety of vaccines. We advise the public not to make any connection between the scientific integrity of SFU and the VRM conference.’ John O’Neil, PhD Professor and Dean http://www.sfu.ca/content/dam/sfu/fhs/news-and-events/news/2013-2014/VRM-Deans%20Statement%202013Mar5.pdf
