The first legitimate 21st century pandemic has materialized, one which is already proving to be a bona fide threat to humanity, with a stealth chimera pathogen of yet unknown origin moving through the population at an astounding rate. Even in its most intense phase, the 2009 Swine Flu pandemic paled in comparison. Nature has been usurped by the medical establishment, converted into a giant repository field trial for untested formulae, which has begun to unhinge its delicate balance, giving rise to bizarre chimera pathogens (which never would have surfaced, but for their intervention).

Government will use the Corona scare as a pretext to fast-track vaccine mandates into law everywhere. We have to be prepared for a series of battles ahead, in the fight for individual health freedom. The most pressing concern on our agenda is an emergency measure decree issued by the World Health Organization, imposed by western leaders upon the community at large, with forced inoculation of the entire population, regardless of quarantines. The plan is in place, all the paperwork ready, awaiting the go ahead (the Model State Emergency Health Powers Act). Buckle up and get out your marching boots, as this is going to be a treacherous year ahead for all of us. Large protest rallies are expected to be springing up around the world.

Thus far, all widespread, non-essential travel restrictions have been recommended, less so imposed – however that is about to change with strict border enforcement; and large public events have been restricted. Thus far, the onus has been placed on families to self-monitor and to self-isolate. But this is a quickly evolving situation. Given the scale of pre-packaged press kit coverage painting a doomsday scenario, the march toward a globally sanctioned forced vaccination policy for every citizen to curtail Corona and “save humanity” is going to be rolled out in unison at an appointed juncture in the coming months. This dilemma has already redefined the landscape, giving rise to new authoritarianism. The WHO was established in 1948 in the wake of fascism, to prevent any repeat of Nazism and secure the foundation and integrity of health rights and freedoms for all nations. Regrettably, powers enshrined to them have been exploited, as Globalism sinks its teeth into humanity. In actuality, the WHO is the hydra protecting and facilitating powerful vaccine corporations, which is a dangerous combination. It is time for families to wake up to uncloaking of the new world order in its glory. We cannot remain passive to this threat, and perhaps the Corona outbreak is the spark that we needed to galvanize and take back what is in the process of being seized from us all, universal, inalienable self-determination of the body, a tenet which was enshrined in the Nuremberg code, which is destined to be shredded and rewritten, unless we intervene.

I can’t stress enough the urgency, as we’re at the headwaters right now of imminent forced vaccination. I say this with absolutely no reservation or doubt. Everyone concerned about civil liberties and health freedom, please get active with this issue. Notify your friends and loved ones. This is the real takeover. It’s happening now. It will unfold far quicker than ever expected. Knowledge is the antidote to fear, and in this hour of need, families have a clear-cut choice: either to remain passive and join the herd or stand free from tyranny. Our ancestors knew which decision to make, because they, too, sensed danger and saw the writing on the wall. Mayday, mayday, mayday!
