Geothermal energy
physics
Written By:

    John W. Lund 

See Article History

Geothermal energy, form of energy conversion in which heat energy from within Earth is captured and harnessed for cooking, bathing, space heating, electrical power generation, and other uses.
Nesjavellir Geothermal Power Plant
Nesjavellir Geothermal Power Plant
The Nesjavellir Geothermal Power Plant, Iceland.
Gretar Ívarsson
earth day logo
Britannica Explores
Earth's To-Do List
Human action has triggered a vast cascade of environmental problems that now threaten the continued ability of both natural and human systems to flourish. Solving the critical environmental problems of global warming, water scarcity, pollution, and biodiversity loss are perhaps the greatest challenges of the 21st century. Will we rise to meet them?

Heat from Earth’s interior generates surface phenomena such as lava flows, geysers, fumaroles, hot springs, and mud pots. The heat is produced mainly by the radioactive decay of potassium, thorium, and uranium in Earth’s crust and mantle and also by friction generated along the margins of continental plates. The subsequent annual low-grade heat flow to the surface averages between 50 and 70 milliwatts (mW) per square metre worldwide. In contrast, incoming solar radiation striking Earth’s surface provides 342 watts per square metre annually (see solar energy). Geothermal heat energy can be recovered and exploited for human use, and it is available anywhere on Earth’s surface. The estimated energy that can be recovered and utilized on the surface is 4.5 × 106 exajoules, or about 1.4 × 106 terawatt-years, which equates to roughly three times the world’s annual consumption of all types of energy.

The amount of usable energy from geothermal sources varies with depth and by extraction method. The increase in temperature of rocks and other materials underground averages 20–30 °C (36–54 °F) per kilometre (0.6 mile) depth worldwide in the upper part of the lithosphere, and this rate of increase is much higher in most of Earth’s known geothermal areas. Normally, heat extraction requires a fluid (or steam) to bring the energy to the surface. Locating and developing geothermal resources can be challenging. This is especially true for the high-temperature resources needed for generating electricity. Such resources are typically limited to parts of the world characterized by recent volcanic activity or located along plate boundaries or within crustal hot spots. Even though there is a continuous source of heat within Earth, the extraction rate of the heated fluids and steam can exceed the replenishment rate, and, thus, use of the resource must be managed sustainably.
Uses

Geothermal energy use can be divided into three categories: direct-use applications, geothermal heat pumps (GHPs), and electric power generation.
Get exclusive access to content from our 1768 First Edition with your subscription.
Subscribe today
Direct uses

Probably the most widely used set of applications involves the direct use of heated water from the ground without the need for any specialized equipment. All direct-use applications make use of low-temperature geothermal resources, which range between about 50 and 150 °C (122 and 302 °F). Such low-temperature geothermal water and steam have been used to warm single buildings, as well as whole districts where numerous buildings are heated from a central supply source. In addition, many swimming pools, balneological (therapeutic) facilities at spas, greenhouses, and aquaculture ponds around the world have been heated with geothermal resources. Other direct uses of geothermal energy include cooking, industrial applications (such as drying fruit, vegetables, and timber), milk pasteurization, and large-scale snow melting. For many of those activities, hot water is often used directly in the heating system, or it may be used in conjunction with a heat exchanger, which transfers heat when there are problematic minerals and gases such as hydrogen sulfide mixed in with the fluid.
Bagno Vignoni: hot springs
Bagno Vignoni: hot springs
Hot springs in Bagno Vignoni, Italy.
© Uroš Medved/Shutterstock.com
Geothermal heat pumps

Geothermal heat pumps (GHPs) take advantage of the relatively stable moderate temperature conditions that occur within the first 300 metres (1,000 feet) of the surface to heat buildings in the winter and cool them in the summer. In that part of the lithosphere, rocks and groundwater occur at temperatures between 5 and 30 °C (41 and 86 °F). At shallower depths, where most GHPs are found, such as within 6 metres (about 20 feet) of Earth’s surface, the temperature of the ground maintains a near-constant temperature of 10 to 16 °C (50 to 60 °F). Consequently, that heat can be used to help warm buildings during the colder months of the year when the air temperature falls below that of the ground. Similarly, during the warmer months of the year, warm air can be drawn from a building and circulated underground, where it loses much of its heat and is returned.


A GHP system is made up of a heat exchanger (a loop of pipes buried in the ground) and a pump. The heat exchanger transfers heat energy between the ground and air at the surface by means of a fluid that circulates through the pipes; the fluid used is often water or a combination of water and antifreeze. During warmer months, heat from warm air is transferred to the heat exchanger and into the fluid. As it moves through the pipes, the heat is dispersed to the rocks, soil, and groundwater. The pump is reversed during the colder months. Heat energy stored in the relatively warm ground raises the temperature of the fluid. The fluid then transfers this energy to the heat pump, which warms the air inside the building.

GHPs have several advantages over more conventional heating and air-conditioning systems. They are very efficient, using 25–50 percent less electricity than comparable conventional heating and cooling systems, and they produce less pollution. The reduction in energy use associated with GHPs can translate into as much as a 44 percent decrease in greenhouse gas emissions compared with air-source heat pumps (which transfer heat between indoor and outdoor air). In addition, when compared with electric resistance heating systems (which convert electricity to heat) coupled with standard air-conditioning systems, GHPs can produce up to 72 percent less greenhouse gas emissions.
Electric power generation

Depending upon the temperature and the fluid (steam) flow, geothermal energy can be used to generate electricity. Geothermal power plants can produce electricity in three ways. Despite their differences in design, all three control the behaviour of steam and use it to drive electrical generators. Given that the excess water vapour at the end of each process is condensed and returned to the ground, where it is reheated for later use, geothermal power is considered a form of renewable energy.

Some geothermal power plants simply collect rising steam from the ground. In such “dry steam” operations, the heated water vapour is funneled directly into a turbine that drives an electrical generator. Other power plants, built around the flash steam and binary cycle designs, use a mixture of steam and heated water (“wet steam”) extracted from the ground to start the electrical generation process.
dry steam geothermal power generation
dry steam geothermal power generation
Dry steam geothermal power generation.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

In flash steam power plants, pressurized high-temperature water is drawn from beneath the surface into containers at the surface, called flash tanks, where the sudden decrease in pressure causes the liquid water to “flash,” or vaporize, into steam. The steam is then used to power the turbine-generator set. In contrast, binary-cycle power plants use steam driven off a secondary working fluid (such as ammonia and hydrocarbons) contained within a closed loop of pipes to power the turbine-generator set. In this process, geothermally heated water is drawn up through a different set of pipes, and much of the energy stored in the heated water is transferred to the working fluid through a heat exchanger. The working fluid then vaporizes. After the vapour from the working fluid passes through the turbine, it is recondensed and piped back to the heat exchanger.

Electrical power usually requires water heated above 175 °C (347 °F) to be economical. In geothermal plants using the Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC), a special type of binary-cycle technology that utilizes lower-temperature heat sources (such as biomass combustion and industrial waste heat), water temperatures as low as 85–90 °C (185–194 °F) may be used.


History

Geothermal energy from natural pools and hot springs has long been used for cooking, bathing, and warmth. There is evidence that Native Americans used geothermal energy for cooking as early as 10,000 years ago. In ancient times, baths heated by hot springs were used by the Greeks and Romans, and examples of geothermal space heating date at least as far back as the Roman city of Pompeii during the 1st century ce. Such uses of geothermal energy were initially limited to sites where hot water and steam were accessible.

Although the world’s first district heating system was installed at Chaudes-Aigues, France, in the 14th century, it was not until the late 19th century that other cities, as well as industries, began to realize the economic potential of geothermal resources. Geothermal heat was delivered to the first residences in the United States in 1892, to Warm Springs Avenue in Boise, Idaho, and most of the city used geothermal heat by 1970. The largest and most-famous geothermal district heating system is in Reykjavík, Iceland, where 99 percent of the city received geothermal water for space heating starting in the 1930s. Early industrial direct-use applications included the extraction of borate compounds from geothermal fluids at Larderello, Italy, during the early 19th century.

The first geothermal electric power generation also took place in Larderello, with the development of an experimental plant in 1904. The first commercial use of that technology occurred there in 1913 with the construction of a plant that produced 250 kilowatts (kW). Geothermal power plants were commissioned in New Zealand starting in 1958 and at the Geysers in northern California in 1960. The Italian and American plants were dry steam facilities, where low-permeability reservoirs produced only steam. In New Zealand, however, high-temperature and high-pressure water emerges naturally as a mixture made up of 80 percent superheated water and 20 percent steam. The steam coming directly from the ground is used for power generation right away. It is sent to the power plant through pipes. In contrast, the superheated water from the ground is separated from the mixture and flashed into steam. Most geothermal plants at present are of this latter “wet steam” type.

By 2015 more than 80 countries were using geothermal energy, either directly or in conjunction with GHPs, the leaders being China, Turkey, Iceland, Japan, Hungary, and the United States. The total worldwide installed capacity for direct use in 2015 was about 73,290 megawatts thermal (MWt) utilizing about 163,273 gigawatt-hours per year (587,786 terajoules per year), producing an annual utilization factor—the annual energy produced by the plant (in megawatt-hours) divided by the installed capacity of the plant (in megawatts [MW]) multiplied by 8,760 hours—of 28 percent in the heating mode.

Geothermal energy was used to produce electricity in 24 countries in the early 21st century, the leaders being the United States, the Philippines, Indonesia, Mexico, New Zealand, and Italy. In 2016 the total worldwide installed capacity for electrical power generation was about 13,400 MW, producing about 75,000 gigawatt-hours per year for a utilization factor of 71 percent (equivalent to 6,220 full-load operating hours annually). Many geothermal fields have utilization factors around 95 percent (equivalent to 8,322 full-load operating hours annually), the highest for any form of renewable energy. The “waste” fluid from the power plant is often used for lower-temperature applications, such as the bottom cycle in a binary-cycle plant, before being injected back into the reservoir. Such cascaded uses can be found in the United States, Iceland, and Germany.
Extraction

Geothermal energy is best found in areas with high thermal gradients. Those gradients occur in regions affected by recent volcanism, in areas located along plate boundaries (such as along the Pacific Ring of Fire), or in areas marked by thin crust (hot spots) such as Yellowstone National Park and the Hawaiian Islands. Geothermal reservoirs associated with those regions must have a heat source, adequate water recharge, a reservoir with adequate permeability or faults that allow fluids to rise close to the surface, and an impermeable caprock to prevent the escape of the heat. In addition, such reservoirs must be economically accessible (that is, within the range of drills).
A geothermal power station in Iceland that creates electricity from heat generated in Earth's interior.
A geothermal power station in Iceland that creates electricity from heat generated in Earth's interior.
© Barbara Whitney
Iceland: geothermal water
Iceland: geothermal water
Drilling for geothermal water in Iceland.
Contunico © ZDF Enterprises GmbH, Mainz
See all videos for this article

The heated fluid from a geothermal resource is tapped by drilling wells, sometimes as deep as 9,100 metres (about 30,000 feet), and is extracted by pumping or by natural artesian flow (where the weight of the water forces it to the surface). Water and steam are then piped to the power plant to generate electricity or through insulated pipelines—which may be buried or placed aboveground—for use in heating and cooling applications. In general, electric power plant pipelines are limited to roughly 1.6 km (1 mile) in length to minimize heat loss in the steam. However, direct-use pipelines spanning several tens of kilometres have been installed with a temperature loss of less than 2–5 °C (3.6–9 °F), depending on the flow rate. The most economically efficient facilities are located close to the geothermal resource to minimize the expense of constructing long pipelines. In the case of electric power generation, costs can be kept down by locating the facility near electrical transmission lines to transmit the electricity to market.
geothermal energy potential
geothermal energy potential
Map of geothermal energy resources in the United States.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Exhaustion

Geothermal resources can be exhausted if the rate of heat extraction exceeds the rate of natural heat recharge. Normally, geothermal resources can be used for 20 to 30 years; however, the energy output may decrease with time, making continued development uneconomical. On the other hand, geothermal electric power has been produced continually from the Larderello geothermal field since the early 1900s and at the Geysers since 1960. Although there has been a decline in both of those fields, this problem has been partially overcome by drilling new wells and by recharging the water supply. At the Geysers, electrical capacity declined from 1,800 MW to approximately 1,000 MW, but about 200 MW of capacity was returned by placing the field under one operator and constructing pipelines to deliver wastewater for recharging the reservoir. Projects such as the Reykjavík district heating system have been operating since the 1930s with little change in the output, and the Oregon Institute of Technology geothermal heating system has been operating since the 1950s with no change in production. Thus, with proper management, geothermal resources can be sustainable for many years, and they can even recover if use is suspended for a period of time.
Subscribe Today!
Similar Topics


Environmental effects and economic costs

The environmental effects of geothermal development and power generation include the changes in land use associated with exploration and plant construction, noise and sight pollution, the discharge of water and gases, the production of foul odours, and soil subsidence. Most of those effects, however, can be mitigated with current technology so that geothermal uses have no more than a minimal impact on the environment. For example, Klamath Falls, Oregon, has approximately 600 geothermal wells for residential space heating. The city has also invested in a district heating system and a downtown snow-melting system, and it provides heating to local businesses. However, none of the systems used to supply and deliver geothermal energy are visible in town.
geothermal energy uses
geothermal energy uses
Diagram of various geothermal energy uses displayed according to the water temperature of the geothermal resource.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

In addition, GHPs have a very minimal effect on the environment, because they make use of shallow geothermal resources within 100 metres (about 330 feet) of the surface. GHPs cause only small temperature changes to the groundwater or rocks and soil in the ground. In closed-loop systems the ground temperature around the vertical boreholes is slightly increased or decreased; the direction of the temperature change is governed by whether the system is dominated by heating (which would be the case in colder regions) or cooling (which would be the case in warmer regions). With balanced heating and cooling loads, the ground temperatures will remain stable. Likewise, open-loop systems using groundwater or lake water would have very little effect on temperature, especially in regions characterized by high groundwater flows.

Comparing the benefits of geothermal energy with other renewable energy sources, the main advantage of geothermal energy is that its base load is available 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, whereas solar and wind are available only about one-third of the time. In addition, the cost of geothermal energy varies between 5 and 10 cents per kilowatt-hour, which can be competitive with other energy sources, such as coal. The main disadvantage of geothermal energy development is the high initial investment cost in constructing the facilities and infrastructure and the high risk of proving the resources. (Geothermal resources in low-permeability rocks are often found, and exploration activities often drill “dry” holes—that is, holes that produce steam in amounts too low to be exploited economically.) However, once the resource is proven, the annual cost of fuel (that is, hot water and steam) is low and tends not to escalate in price.
